let me start with a brief motivation and
a high level overview of features
of dataled and the problems that it may
solve
so
there are a
number of problems that most of us have
seen during their careers
basically regardless of which career
stage we're in
one of them
can be summarized in this little study
here so you write a paper about an
algorithm
you stay up late you generate good
looking figures you do it in an
interactive
r session or matlab session or python
session or whatever
you tweak a lot of parameters to make
your algorithm work
a lot of the options may a gui is
involved
and then at the end of the night
it works it looks fantastic it's great
but the next morning you wake up
basically hung over
and you have no idea what you actually
did to produce those figures and which
of the figures are actually the ones
that needed to be reported in the
manuscript and you have to repeat the
work of last night again
the next little story is your research
project produces phenomenal results
you're at the end of your phd you're
about to graduate but your laptop
the one and only place that stores the
source code for your results the figures
everything
is either stolen or it just broke down
as laptops do as this really sad story
of a fifth year chemistry graduate
student who is desperate to buy back
their laptop that was stolen just before
they were to defend their phd and was
the only place that had the presentation
on it
a different question
um maybe
mostly for the pis and supervisors
included in the audience
is this one here the graduate student
approaches the supervisor
they complain that the research idea
just does not work it's completely
useless
weeks of discussions proceeding
and it
basically becomes apparent that the oral
communication between the two may be
also the virtual
it really doesn't suffice the student
can't sufficiently explain for example
the environment that they use the
software versions the
packages that they use the algorithms
that they develop
and the supervisor
has no means of actually taking a look
at what the student has done
[Music]
or use the students project further and
there's no way to find a fix and
what used to be a promising project
is now doomed to fail due to
miscommunication or a lack of sufficient
collaborative
means
another problem is that
you've had a post doc
or a graduate student in your lab and
they wrote the script and replied it
successfully published it
on a specific data set but a couple of
months or years later there's new data
and that script used to work so well
should also be used on that new data set
but we're using the script fails simply
because everyone forgot how it worked
and it takes days or weeks to figure out
how to adjust it to the new data or how
to actually run it
and then the last thing is
you
work on a research research question and
a lab that you admire has just published
a paper with a really interesting result
so you
take that paper to a journal club you
analyze it you find out everything that
they did in the method section and then
you've tried to re-implement their
analysis but
the results that you obtain from the
data just like nowhere what the original
authors reported and there's also no way
for you to make it work
now
the beautiful thing about
these are not the beautiful thing the
astonishing thing about all of these
problems is that they have all been
reported about 30 years ago in a paper
that is a really nice read that i can
recommend
and these problems they are still common
there are labs and researchers that have
figured out how to solve
those problems for themselves
but
i would make the bold suggestion that
these problems uh in one or the other
form are still so prevalent that they
still in it their entirety pose a threat
to the reproducibility to the efficiency
of scientific work
and
the solutions to them
they are in principle they are not new
already 30 years ago
buckheid and the navajo had means to to
fix all of those and 20 years ago there
were other people who had different
means to fix those and 10 years ago and
today um there are amazing solutions
that can that can help with these
problems and and solve them
but
as a field there's still too much of a
rapid disability crisis there's still
too much of not applying solutions for
these problems and obviously there are
numerous uh solutions uh
many many more than i know you'll know
lots of them
but we still need to shift the practices
in our field to overcome
these common problems and i hope that um
in this workshop
we'll introduce one or two other tools
that you can add to your tool stack
in your daily endeavor to make science
more efficient more reproducible um more
meaningful and so forth
so
um
what we're going to talk about here is
data light which is a tool that can help
with small scale or large-scale data
management it's an academic software for
a group of
basically neuroscientists that
develop it
mostly it's open source
and it is a tool that comes as a command
line client
and with a python api and what i want to
do now is give you a quick rundown of
the basics of data led and a little bit
about its core features so that you have
an idea of whether you want to stay in
this workshop or not
so
i've already decided it is a command
line tool and it's available for all
major operating systems linux macos
windows where mit license so
just open source software you can
contribute to us or to the project if
you want to
greatly appreciate any kind of
contribution
if you're interested it is built on top
of two version control tools get and get
annex and i've run a little pre-service
here in this group of people and most of
you actually knew it so
i will
talk about keywords or i will throw
in some git related keywords
but
if there's anything that
you actually don't know then do
feel free to to ask anything even the
most basic question don't hesitate to
to call me out for um
for
just uh trying to
to not explain something properly
um but get in get annex for those who
have not heard of either one of those
tools they are very popular and very
powerful and also very very established
version control tools
and building up from these two tools
dataled has
three main features as i like to
summarize it it is capable of version
control and importantly version
controlling arbitrarily learned content
will find out why that is
a cool or impressive thing compared to
git what this allows is that you can not
only version control your code or your
manuscripts that you write but you can
also version control your data or your
conversion control your software or
everything together alongside of each
other
the next large feature is transport
mechanisms for sharing and obtaining
data and that makes
data consumption
as easy as it is to install software on
a for example debian
based or linux based system
where with a single line of code you can
basically install arbitrarily large data
sets for your disposal on your systems
what it also allows you is that you can
extend the collaborative features of it
that you may have used in your previous
work
also to your data analysis to your data
acquisition to your next experiment
and so forth
and the last feature are computationally
reproducible data analysis and i won't
be talking too much about them in this
workshop
but what datalet
allows you to do is to track and also
share provenance that is information on
how a digital object came to be and also
how to
recreate or redo this process
automatically
of any digital object that you may have
on your computer and there are
loads of more
features it's a very versatile software
but you'll see
that in passing throughout the workshop
and importantly
datalit is a tool that's completely
domain agnostic i'm a psychologist and
the people that develop it
come from neuroscience predominantly but
we have people working in geosciences in
physics in linguistics
and all throughout the bench it's just
completely domain agnostic so don't be
discouraged from maybe from some
examples you will see especially
tomorrow that use some neuroscientific
stuff you can also use that to version
control your movie library for example
um
let me also highlight a couple or let me
also start with a few acknowledgements
credit for credit is due
and there are
a lot of people that are involved in the
creation and maintenance of the software
um and there are a lot of funder
scientific funders in the u.s and in
germany that make sure that the
developers are paid and that we are able
to to
create and extend the software
and we have a lot of international
collaborators that i also want to
mention here
um and because i'm using their
illustrations really frequently uh in my
slides i definitely want to shout out to
the touring bay project in scriberia for
a really nice
for some really nice open science uh
illustrations um and the touring way
handbook for
um scientific conduct which i can also
recommend to everyone who has not
seen that before
so just to give you a rundown of a
couple of core concepts and features
that we come back over the course of the
workshop
everything that we do
happens in so-called data lab data sets
that is the core data structure and it's
basically just a directory you can
create data sets from scratch and then
they are empty but you can also turn
existing directories
into
data data sets so that you
have a place where the contents
are managed
dataset is a git hit nx repository
underneath the hood so it's the
versioned directory on your computer
but it essentially looks like a
completely normal folder
on your file system so here are two
views one from a file browser one from
the command line from the terminal and a
data set just looks like a regular
directory and also feels like it
importantly
whatever happens in your data set does
not change your data
in any
meaningful or
destructive or transformative way if you
include a pdf into your data set and
version control it it will stay a pdf
there's no custom data structure
involved if data led would cease to
exist from one day or the other if you
happen to uninstall it from your system
on purpose or
um
without purpose without um
just uh inadvertently
you will still be able to to complete to
to use those files they will not depend
on the presence of dataled it's
everything everything is safe
um
in these data led data sets you are able
to version control arbitrarily large
files
and if you are a user of version control
tools then you have the complete
flexibility because we provide uh
something that we call a non-complex
data led core api which is intended to
make version control easier especially
for those people who haven't used it
before because the git workflow can be a
little bit complex
but if you are an adapt git organics
user then you are also completely free
to use whichever git organics commands
you are comfortable using with they are
completely interoperable data light just
adds a
functionality on top of these
tools but it doesn't
impede their functionality and it
doesn't
require you to only use data
a dataset
is version controlled and thus it has a
very transparent history that you can
use to find out what was done um
interact
with the history to for example reset it
to a previous state how it used to be
before
revert changes that you're not happy
with or bring
previously reverted changes back to life
you can
find out what was done when how and by
whom what you can see here for example
the collaborative
work on a paper and and
data analysis where i can transparently
see which author has done what kind of
change at what point in time
you can identify precise versions which
is a really important feature for
example when you're working with data
because data is also subject to change
um
it
is crucial to be able to tell for your
data analysis on which data version on
which subset of
the data an analysis has been run
because if that data changes in the
future for example because it is
extended within files because um
problems in the data are fixed because
different preprocessing is applied the
results that you will obtain from your
analysis change so in order to have a
thorough
uh
thorough transparency on what was
actually done in your analysis having
versions and being able to precisely and
machine readably identify those versions
is crucial for for reproducibility for
transparency for your own for your own
saneness
in working with any kind of data
analysis um data data sets give you the
ability
i have a lot of feedback um
was there a question
okay um i
don't think so but if so um please just
say something
um
datasets give you the ability to consume
and collaborate
you can
install other data sets from other
places
from other computers from
remote sources from github
all kinds of places you'll see that in
detail tomorrow
and you can also
publish data sets to a lot of other
places such as cloud storage
repository hosting services such as
github gitlab and then you're able to
keep all of these data sets in sync for
example by pulling updates from a
different data set or by pushing the
updates that you locally do in your data
set to other places this gives you the
ability to sink backups it also gives
you the ability to collaborate with
other people transparently across time
zones and borders
and so forth
um
i've already
mentioned the provenance what data led
does and that's an addition on top of
git and cadence so you wouldn't be able
to do that with git get nx commands is
that it can record whatever it was that
has been done in a data set and that
includes record remote origin of files
for example if you
include a pdf
into your data analysis that
has all of the methods for your
algorithm then you can actually also
include information where that file is
retrieved from so that it can be
retrieved automatically
by people that you share your data set
with or by yourself once you've
forgotten where you actually retrieved
that pdf from
you can also use commands that execute
all kinds of um
any kind
of command inside of your data set and
then record the outcome of that in a way
that makes it possible to repeat exactly
what has been done by a machine for
example when you run a script on some
input data that produces some outputs
you can
track this provenance in a way that
makes it possible to repeat
this analysis execution automatically
and then it also includes a check
whether the outcome
of the first and
um
of the first run and its repetition are
actually identical or whether something
changed
and then there's something that we call
nesting
which is a little bit counter-intuitive
the first time you hear it but what you
can do with datalet datasets is you can
nest them into each other that is have a
linked hierarchy of datasets
we call that superdataset and subdataset
a superdataset is a top level dataset a
sub data set is any data set underneath
and these hierarchies of data sets can
be arbitrarily deep so you can have any
amount of sub data sets in a individual
data set or any amount of data sets sub
data sets
in this kind of row
what that allows you to do
is to have a mechanism in which you can
create data set modules
just like for example software modules
that you can flexibly reuse in any way
you please and that you can
quite easily share and access control so
for example we have one data set which
is the raw data that comes from your
next eeg study it contains anonymous
data from patients
and that is a data like data set and you
keep it just locked up
on your hard drive and no one else is
allowed to see it because the data
protection officer will kill you
but then you do some pre-processing
which just strips all of the identifying
information out of any of the files and
uh includes your favorite pre-processing
pipeline
uh and in order to have a transparent
track for yourself and collaborates on
what was done you add this raw data set
as a data dependency to your
pre-processing data set and what that
results in is a version link to the
precise version and identity of raw data
that was used to generate this
pre-processed data and once you have
this kind of data module with
pre-processed data then you can
distribute it to all of your graduate
students they each do their own analysis
with it so they reuse this
pre-processed data module
really flexibly
for their analysis they each write the
paper and when you take a look at the
paper and you have appropriate
permissions and everything is shared
with you
then you can have this transparent track
of everything that has been done in
order to generate the results of this
paper here and you can trace it back
through the analysis through the
pre-processing back to the raw data
if
if shared with you and if the raw data
or the pre-processed data changes if you
have different pipeline that's one then
you actually can automatically
for example update all of these data
dependencies repeat the analysis and
have this really transparent pipeline
with individual components
as a hierarchy of data sets and what you
can also do is work with these
hierarchies of data sets as if they are
just a single data set uh everything
that we'll be talking about has a
recursive option
and that applies whatever operation is
version control provenance records
anything throughout any
number of linked sub-data sets so that
can for example update everything
up to the raw data in this in this
example here
and then the last feature is third-party
integrations
what we try to do is to provide a tool
that integrates as best as possible into
workflows that you might already be
using so if you are using google drive
to backup your data or if you're using
fixture to publish your posters or if
you're using github to publish your code
then all of those third-party services
are already something that data it works
with natively so that we have
streamlined procedures that use whatever
service or tool you already use
in the very same fashion and if there's
something that is missing and just
you know make a feature request then we
might able
to to implement that
and just give you some real world
examples of what datalit can be used for
in really large use cases to to give you
an idea
um one thing that we use it for is as a
behind-the-scenes infrastructure
component and that's uh for example used
in the canadian open neuroscience
platform but also stuff like an open
room so if you know open neuro it's this
portal here where you can publish and
also retrieve
terabytes of open neuroscientific data
sets and for every data set that's on
open neuro
you actually also have the possibility
to get a download link for datalat with
which you can
clone this data set because openurl in
the background as a
data management tool uses datalite in
every single dataset is a datalet
dataset and if you go to brainlife.io
which is a cloud computing platform
where you can in ingest all kinds of
data sets directly from rubinuro
this is also
internally fueled by datalet
with data provision
a different use case more on the
personal side
individual research side is for creating
and sharing reproducible or open science
so here's for example a paper of mine
which includes code data and manuscript
for paper that i've written and this is
a publicly accessible github repository
which makes scientific outputs
accessible to plenty of people without
requiring a user account and there's
stuff on it about this on the internet
also tutorials it's actually a like
automatically reproducible paper but
importantly it links code links data
headlink software
of this research
that i've done and shares it and here's
another really great example that i very
much like from a colleague from berlin
who has created a really nice study and
then
published this
book is our markdown book
where he
includes all of the data i think it's
one and a half terabytes that are
publicly hosted um you'll get to know
how to do this tomorrow uh including the
code so that everything can be rerun on
demand and expected by
colleagues and the scientific public
we in our institute
which is a quite a large institute use
it for central data management um we are
neuroscientific institute and we use a
lot of open data sets um also stuff
that's access restricted like the uk bio
bank data set and we provide all of this
data internally
as a large super data set which anyone
who
has access
by for example signing the dui dua
can
retrieve any data that they need onto
our cluster in a streamlined fashion and
that saves us disk space and also
coordinates let's say standardization
and pre-processing efforts
um
and then it
we've just very recently
created a computing framework based on
data that for reproducible science but
importantly also for for scalable
science it has been published just last
month
uh where we used a framework that's
based on data to create research that
you can automatically reproduce on your
laptop
for data sets that are too large to fit
on any given compute infrastructure so
what we did with this framework is not
only create these reproducible
provenance track stuff but we
importantly also
ran a really large scale analysis on
hardware that was
essentially
not large enough to fit the raw data
that was used onto it and so if that's
something that interests you then we can
also talk a little bit about this
and
that was the
quick rundown